Dawn/rewards payout IAupdate (#136)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: infrastructure/running-a-validator/operational-tasks/upgrade-your-node.md

---
title: Upgrade a Validator Node
description: Guide to seamlessly upgrading your Polkadot validator node, managing session keys, and executing server maintenance while avoiding downtime and slashing risks.
---

# Upgrade a Validator Node

## Introduction

Upgrading a Polkadot validator node is essential for staying current with network updates and maintaining optimal performance. This guide covers routine and extended maintenance scenarios, including software upgrades and major server changes. Following these steps, you can manage session keys and transition smoothly between servers without risking downtime, slashing, or network disruptions. The process requires strategic planning, especially if you need to perform long-lead maintenance, ensuring your validator remains active and compliant.

This guide will allow validators to seamlessly substitute an active validator server to allow for maintenance operations. The process can take several hours, so ensure you understand the instructions first and plan accordingly.

## Prerequisites

Before beginning the upgrade process for your validator node, ensure the following:

> - You have a fully functional validator setup with all required binaries installed. See [Set Up a Validator](infrastructure/running-a-validator/onboarding-and-offboarding/set-up-validator.md) and [Validator Requirements](polkadot-docs/infrastructure/running-a-validator/requirements.md) for additional guidance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have a fully functional validator setup with all required binaries installed. See [Set Up a Validator](/infrastructure/running-a-validator/onboarding-and-offboarding/set-up-validator/){target=\_blank} and [Validator Requirements](/polkadot-docs/infrastructure/running-a-validator/requirements/){target=\_blank} for additional guidance
```

- Your VPS infrastructure has enough capacity to run a secondary validator instance temporarily for the upgrade process

## Session Keys

Session keys are used to sign validator operations and establish a connection between your validator node and your staking proxy account. These keys are stored in the client, and any change to them requires a waiting period. Specifically, if you modify your session keys, the change will take effect only after the current session is completed and two additional sessions have passed.

> Remembering this delayed effect when planning upgrades is crucial to ensure that your validator continues to function correctly and avoids interruptions. To learn more about session keys and their importance, check out the [Keys section](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-cryptography#keys){target=\_blank} in the Polkadot Wiki.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this page will still exist on the Wiki and we don't have session keys documented on our cryptography page. Just flagging this now 🤷‍♀️

Author: I opened a ticket to follow up on this. Changed it to a generic "To learn more about session keys and their importance, visit the [Keys section](TODO: update-path){target=\_blank}." until we figure it out.

## Keystore

> Your validator server's `keystore` folder holds the private keys needed for signing network-level transactions. It is important not to duplicate or transfer this folder between validator instances. Doing so could result in multiple validators signing with the duplicate keys, leading to severe consequences such as [equivocation slashing](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=\_blank}. Instead, always generate new session keys for each validator instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your validator server's `keystore` folder holds the private keys needed for signing network-level transactions. It is important not to duplicate or transfer this folder between validator instances. Doing so could result in multiple validators signing with the duplicate keys, leading to severe consequences such as [equivocation slashing](/infrastructure/staking-mechanics/offenses-and-slashes/#equivocation-slash){target=\_blank}. Instead, always generate new session keys for each validator instance.
```

Remembering this delayed effect when planning upgrades is crucial to ensure that your validator continues to function correctly and avoids interruptions. To learn more about session keys and their importance, check out the [Keys section](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-cryptography#keys){target=\_blank} in the Polkadot Wiki.

### Keystore

Your validator server's `keystore` folder holds the private keys needed for signing network-level transactions. It is important not to duplicate or transfer this folder between validator instances. Doing so could result in multiple validators signing with the duplicate keys, leading to severe consequences such as [equivocation slashing](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=\_blank}. Instead, always generate new session keys for each validator instance.

Here is the default path to the `keystore`:

```bash
/home/polkadot/.local/share/polkadot/chains/<chain>/keystore
```

Taking care to manage your keys securely ensures that your validator operates safely and without the risk of slashing penalties.

## Upgrade Using Backup Validator

> The following instructions outline how to temporarily switch between two validator nodes, referred to as `Validator A` (the original active validator) and `Validator B` (the backup node used for maintenance purposes):

Reviewer: Validator A and Validator B don't need to be in back ticks
